As our commenters bring out, our focus today is on something that is actually very private
and perhaps very sensitive.
And that is our motives.
Motives do out deep within our figurative hearts.
They really are described as the impaling force behind our conduct and decision-making.
But today our text puts us on alert about these motives.
And we need to have Jehovah's viewpoint of them.
Let's consider the full scripture.
Open your Bibles, please, to Proverbs chapter 16 and verse 2.
We're alerted to this because as we already discussed, the motives are impaling force.
They can help us do what is right in God's eyes, but also it can deceive us into doing
what is wrong.
Notice what the Bible says about this.
Proverbs 16 2 says, all of man's ways seem right to him, but Jehovah examines the motives.
Interesting.
We could set a very good goal for ourselves, be involved in what appears to be very good
things.
But as the Bible says, our ways or our thoughts may appear good, but Jehovah examines
them.
And he sees that our motives are not pure or not in total harmony with his will.
Well, we could meet up with his disapproval and even sharp judgment.
How then can we make sure that our motives are pure and that they are pleasing to Jehovah
God?
In order to understand that, we have to understand our hearts because this is where our motives
reside in our figurative hearts.
And an important aspect of our hearts is brought out for us.
A Jeremiah chapter 17 and verse 9.
Remember it says there that the heart is more treacherous than anything else and is desperate
who can know it.
You see, our imperfect figurative hearts are inherently selfish.
It thinks there's only one thing and that is itself.
And our hearts could deceive us into justifying errors on our part or even justify self-seeking
actions using even Jehovah's service for our own personal benefit.
Now, this is a dangerous thing.
A case in point is brought out for us.
If you look at the cross reference to the scripture at 1 Samuel chapter 15 verses 13
and 14, in fact, let's open our Bibles to that portion of scripture.
It's the account of King Saul and Jehovah God gave King Saul a very definite directions
on what he wanted him to do.
That is, completely annihilate the Amalakites from the greatest to the least of them.
He was to get rid of them.
Now, we look at verses 5 through 7.
We see that Saul took on this assignment and he was doing rather well.
He was doing exactly what Jehovah had told him to do and that is annihilate the Amalakites.
But in verse 9, we see something went wrong, something changed.
In verse 9, it says, however, Saul and the people spared Egy, who was the King, and the
best of the flock, the herd, the fattened animals, the rams, and all that was good.
They did not want to devote them to destruction, but all the goods that were worthless to
and unwanted, well, these they devoted to destruction.
So we see something happened here.
Saul developed or had his motives for one point only using Jehovah's service, this commission
to do what?
To glorify himself, to benefit himself.
In fact, if you look in verse 12, he even went so far to go to Carmel and erected a monument
to himself, glorifying this great victory that he performed over the Amalakites, bringing
King A. gag back with him as perhaps a trophy to show everyone that he dominated this
nation, got rid of them, and enriched himself by these beautiful animals that would no doubt
benefit the herds that they had.
Well, was Jehovah fooled by this?
Obviously not.
Jehovah saw right through it.
He saw right to the core of the matter that Saul's motives were not pure.
And so when he sent Samuel to the camp, he told Samuel to help him.
He's been basically condemned, ripping the rulership away from him and no longer was
he pleasing to Jehovah God.
Saul though, before he heard this denunciation from Jehovah, thought he was still in good
stead with God and putting on a big show of being a servant of God, a faithful man.
He said in verse 13,
May Jehovah bless you when he saw Samuel.
I have carried out the word of Jehovah, and Samuel said him straight, I know you didn't.
You were lying.
You were seeking your own glory and not Jehovah's glory.
Well, what can we learn from this account?
It's a very good account to have in mind because it's a sharp contrast or an acute example
of what we're discussing here today about motives.
We see that Saul's motives were not pure.
He was not putting Jehovah first in his life.
And in fact, his impure motives moved him to an unfaithful course with God and meeting
up with his strong judgment against him.
How can we avoid making such a terrible mistake and succumb to, perhaps, impure reasonings
or motives that we might have in our hearts?
How can we even know it, as the Bible says, that it's there?
What Jehovah does help us read our motives and understand what's going on.
And Hebrews chapter 4 and verse 12, we can see that he's Jehovah has given us an am marvelous
tool to do that.
It says,
For the word of God is alive and exerts power and is sharper than any two-edged sword
and pierces even to the dividing of soul and spirit and of joints from the marrow and
is able to discern thoughts and intentions of the heart.
So it's no wonder that we are giving strong abmunition from the faithful slave to read
God's word the Bible every day because it's by means of this amazing tool that can pierce
through and slice through the hard shell of our inf figurative, imperfect hearts to reveal
what's really there and then to do something about it.
You see, as we learned in this past week's Watchtower, what a wonderful article it was
and what beautiful guidance it gave us about how to gain strength from God's word but
also how to accomplish this very difficult assignment, if you will, of knowing what's
in our hearts.
Here we were told that before we read God's word that we should pray, ask Jehovah's
Spirit to guide and direct us and then after reading it, imagine that we are there in
the very account that we're reading in the shoes of the ones that we're talking about,
meditate on these things.
Understand what is truly going on in our hearts, how does this information apply to me personally
and then apply what we learn?
When you see by doing that, well, then we can not only reveal what's going on inside
of our hearts, but then we can take steps to correct our motives if they need correcting.
Perhaps as young brothers, we desire to reach out for service as a privilege and a congregation
and it's a wonderful thing to be reached out to be a ministerial servant, to be an elder,
but what are the true motives that why do we want this assignment?
This is where following this four-step procedure that we learn can help.
Why not read all the qualifications that a ministerial servant or an elder should have, meditate
upon them, apply these things into our life and ask ourselves, why do I really want to
be a servant in the congregation?
Is it to glorify myself, to promote myself, or to actually do the work?
Even ourselves being Timothy or Paul, or other faithful men mentioned in the Bible who
were expended themselves, poured themselves out on behalf of God's people, and in doing
Jehovah's will, even perhaps being looked down upon both by those in the congregation
as well as in the outside, are we willing to do that?
Actually all of us who desire theocratic assignments should go through this kind of procedure
to make sure that our hearts are motives, really, are in harmony with Jehovah's will
for this assignment as well as what he wants for us.
During this we'll perhaps maybe find that we may be harbing a soul-like motive
and perhaps wanting to use Jehovah's service for self-interest and to promote ourselves.
I think it's interesting, several years ago back in 2016 at the Remain Loyal to Jehovah
Convention, perhaps you recall the symposium avoid what erodes loyalty, and there they
give the experience of the one of an elder who was taking the lead, how he was revealed.
His motives were revealed by some counsel that an elder had given him, and he saw that
he was not responding correctly.
So what did he do?
He prayed to Jehovah.
And then he took on assignments in the congregation that no one else saw, working after hours perhaps
when someone was at the kingdom hall, doing things that would not put him in the limelight,
yet they were necessary work that needed to be done to carry out God's will on purpose.
This eventually changed his heart.
And as we understand from that video, when that brother was in the basement taking the
lead with the brothers there, it actually saved his life to make these changes and
helped and Jehovah used him to appropriately shepherd the flock during the great tribulation.
Well that's a good example for us, that's what we want to do, and we can.